hello this is chef john from food wishes
calm with bay scallop chowder that's
right I was in the mood for a little
seafood literally and not only our bay
scallops one of the smallest seafood
options at the store they're also one of
the most delicious
and extremely easy to cook especially in
a recipe like this but anyway this came
out incredibly well my only complaint I
pretty much hated how it looked but
anyway we'll get into that later in the
meantime we're gonna start with one of
my favorite first steps of all-time
cooking bacon so we're gonna put a
heavy-duty skillet on medium heat with a
little bit of olive oil in there we're
going to go ahead and cook a couple
strips of bacon that we've sliced in
pieces and we're pretty much going to
cook this bacon all the way we don't
necessarily need it crispy but we do
want most of that fat rendered out and
for some fairly significant
carmelization to happen which is what we
have right about here at that point
we're going to throw in some diced onion
and we'll give that a stir and we'll
saute that for I don't know three or
four minutes maybe five until those
onions soften and kind of get a little
bit golden brown and by the way don't
worry about throwing in a pinch of salt
like we usually do
we're going to be really careful with
salt in this recipe and the bacon does
have enough salt in it to draw a little
bit of moisture out of those onions
which should be enough to deglaze that
bacon goodness from the bottom of the
pan and then once our onions look good
we're going to go ahead and toss in a
little bit of diced celery and a couple
cloves of minced garlic and we'll stir
that in and we'll just cook that for
like a minute as usual we don't want
that garlic to brown so we'll stir that
in and saute that for just a minute
at which point we're gonna add our
liquid and we're going to use two kinds
well actually three but two for now I'm
going to dump in some clam juice and
also a little bit of chicken broth and
ideally that's unsalted chicken broth or
low-sodium because I mentioned earlier
being careful about the salt the bacon
has salt clam juice is generally kind of
salty but anyway we're gonna add those
liquids we're gonna crank our heat up to
medium-high because we do want this to
simmer and while we're waiting let's go
ahead and stir in a cubed potato and I'm
going to use a Yukon Gold I love to
texture for me it's the perfect soup or
chowder potato and usually I like the
color although ironically the color sort
of added to the problems I had later
regarding this dish being sort of
aesthetically challenged today we're
going to stir in those potatoes like I
said we want to bring this up to a
simmer and we'll definitely be adjusting
our final seasonings later but
I'm going to put a little pinch of
freshly ground black pepper in here and
a little pinch of cayenne and once this
mixture does start to simmer go ahead
and back your heat down to maybe medium
maybe medium-low we just want to
maintain a nice gentle simmer until
those potatoes are just about cooked and
we don't need them falling apart at this
stage all right they still can be a
little firm we just don't want them
crunchy and by the way because scallops
have that rich sweet flavor
I want the liquid in this chowder to be
more broth II than thick but if you do
just smash some of those potatoes and
you'll see that will significantly
thicken things up but anyway the
viscosity is up to you you are the boss
of what I don't want to seem like a
sauce at that point I'm going to add one
finely diced red Fresno chili so yes I
do like my bay scallop chowder like I
like my well basically everything else
with a little bit of spice to it at this
point we're also going to throw in a big
splash of cream and we'll stir that in
and then all we're going to do is simmer
that mixture for another maybe five or
six minutes until the cream reduces just
a hair and those potatoes are perfectly
perfectly tender and this is basically
what mine look like when it got to that
stage we can also at this point give it
a little check for salt like I said we
haven't added any yet so if you need to
add a little pinch here go ahead and
then before we add our scallops I'm
going to add one more thing a little
fresh lemon zest in fact we get that
question a lot when do you zest when to
use juice when to use both okay when we
want a lemon flavor but we don't want
the acidity of the juice that's when you
just use the zest and on the other hand
when we're looking mostly for a hit of
acidity with maybe a little bit of lemon
flavor we go for juice but anyway we'll
stir in some lemon zest at that point
we're pretty much ready for our bay
scallops and here they are you buy those
frozen and you thaw them and they should
pretty much look like this but if
there's a little bit of that milky
liquid in the bowl that's fine as long
as these are wild-caught with no
additives or preservatives rinds
then you're good to go and that's what I
have here and you're going to stir those
in and like I said it's only going to
take a minute or two for these to cook
and I believe I was on medium heat here
but if you feel like you need to crank
it up a little bit go ahead basically as
soon as they go from that raw sort of
translucent look to more of a white
color that's pretty much it they will
feel just a little springy under the
spoon or finger and as soon as that
happens you're done you have to turn off
the heat and serve these okay if you
cook any kind of scales too long they
will turn into small chewy rubbery
nuggets they're quite frankly no one
will enjoy so
thinkers are good turn off the heat and
now before we serve this administering
some fresh tarragon I think that sweet
herbaceous flavor is incredibly
important to this dish so please find
some tarragon and as soon as that's
mixed in and we've tasted for final
seasoning we're ready to serve up and up
to this point I was so happy it was
smelling amazing it was tasting amazing
but as soon as I ladle it into the bowl
and garnish with a little extra tarragon
I realized I didn't like how this looked
it just looked kind of dingy to me all
right because we cook that bacon and
onion first this mixture wasn't even
close to your more traditional white
chowder colors when you combine that
with a green from the celery and the
gold from the potato I just did not find
this to have a very appetizing color
although a few people that saw this told
me I was overreacting that it didn't
look that bad but of course I knew them
and when it comes to food don't believe
anything friends or family tell you but
anyway above and beyond it's
questionable appearance this was
absolutely delicious those bay scallops
are so sweet and tender especially when
you only cook them briefly I forget
about the scallops anytime you're eating
bacon and potatoes that's usually a good
experience right so all know I was
extremely happy with this except for
like I said I'd love to figure out how
to make it more beautiful and by the way
if you're saying it might have helped if
you seared the scallops first no I don't
agree and if you read the blog post
you'll hear my theory why but anyway
there you go fresh bay scallop chowder
so if you're a fan of clam chowder
and/or bay scallops I really hope you
give this a try soon so head over to
food wishes comm for all the ingredient
amounts and more info as usual and as
always enjoy